---
sort: 13
---

# Extend Kubernetes

Cluster administrator privileges are required. Some extensions can be used in a malicious mode.

Way to extends:

- Admission controllers
- Custom Resources
- dataset working on nodes
- in-tree plug-ins as part of the controller manager
- binary kubelet plug-ins
- Scheduler extensions
- Authentication with webhooks
- ...



## Definitions


### Controller

[form kubernetes glossary](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/glossary/?fundamental=true):<br>
In Kubernetes, controllers are control loops that watch the state of your cluster (through the apiserver, part of the Control Plane), then make or request changes where needed. Each controller tries to move the current cluster state closer to the desired state.  A controller implement a **Control Loop**.



### Operators

  Operators are controllers that encode some operational knowledge.

[form cloud.redhat.com](https://cloud.redhat.com/blog/introducing-operators-putting-operational-knowledge-into-software):<br>
An Operator is an application-specific controller that extends the Kubernetes API to create, configure, and manage instances of complex stateful applications on behalf of a Kubernetes user. It builds upon the basic Kubernetes resource and controller concepts but includes domain or application-specific knowledge to automate common tasks.



### Control Loop

A control loop is generally implemented by a infinite loop composed by the following steps:

1. Read the state of resources (preferably event-driven)
2. Change the state of objects resources (internal or external the cluster)
3. Update the status of resources (via the API server, status stored in etcd)

In other words:

Read Status -> change world -> update status



### Optimistic Concurrency

During concurrent status write attempts, the API server rejects the latter of the two write operations: it is then up to the client (handle a conflict, retry the write operation, ...).

Changes done before the latter status update, are Optimistic. Conflict errors are normal and they must be always handled.

Other loops following the one optimistic changes, not committed in the status, will retry to update the world to the last state.



## Admission controllers

Admission controllers are called before the API Server, so before the object is stored.

*Request ---> Authentication and Authorization ---> **Admission Control** ---> API Server ---> Storage*


Examples:
- Example of admission controller inside K8s: limit ranges.
- Example of admission controller: inject sidecar to all pods.



## Custom Resources

Let to create new API objects.

### How To

#### Define CDR

create a  CustomResourceDefinition: a meta-resource (a resource that is the definition of another resource).

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  name: tests.isidoro.com
spec:
  group: isidoro.com
  versions:
    - name: v1
      served: true
      storage: true
  scope: Namespaced
  names:
    plural: tests
    singular: test
    kind: Test
    shortNames:
    - ts

```

Example from kubernetes.io:

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  # name must match the spec fields below, and be in the form: <plural>.<group>
  name: crontabs.stable.example.com
spec:
  # group name to use for REST API: /apis/<group>/<version>
  group: stable.example.com
  # list of versions supported by this CustomResourceDefinition
  versions:
    - name: v1
      # Each version can be enabled/disabled by Served flag.
      served: true
      # One and only one version must be marked as the storage version.
      storage: true
      schema:
        openAPIV3Schema:
          type: object
          properties:
            spec:
              type: object
              properties:
                cronSpec:
                  type: string
                image:
                  type: string
                replicas:
                  type: integer
  # either Namespaced or Cluster (default is namespaced)
  scope: Namespaced
  names:
    # plural name to be used in the URL: /apis/<group>/<version>/<plural>
    plural: crontabs
    # singular name to be used as an alias on the CLI and for display
    singular: crontab
    # kind is normally the CamelCased singular type. Your resource manifests use this.
    kind: CronTab
    # shortNames allow shorter string to match your resource on the CLI
    shortNames:
    - ct
```



#### Create CR

Then you can create a CustomResources

```yaml
apiVersion: isidoro.com/v1
kind: test
metadata:
  name: my-obj
spec:
  service: my-service
  scheme: https
  requestsPerSecond: 1000
  paths:
  - /index.html

```

Note: here there is no schema validation. It's possible to add a OpenAPI schema or an admission controller to validate it.

This object is only a definition: the controller inside the cluster is still missing.



#### Create a controller

The simplest form of controller is a for loop polling the custom objects and taking action consequently

A better approach: use the watch API on the API server, which provides a stream of updates when they occur. This can be complicated: it is highly recommended that you use a well-supported mechanism such as the Informer pattern exposed in the client-go library.

#### Validation and defaulting

This can be achieved:

- adding a basic validation via an OpenAPI specification for our objects
- adding a validating admission controller via the dynamic admission control system: this is a simple HTTP application that can optionally run outside the cluster

#### Install a validating admission controller

We need to specify it as a Kubernetes ValidatingWebhookConfiguration, an object that specifies:

- the endpoint where the admission controller runs
- the resource
- the action (example CREATE) where the admission controller should be run.

Example:

```yaml
apiVersion: admissionregistration.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ValidatingWebhookConfiguration
metadata:
  name: isidoro-validator
webhooks:
- name: validator.isidoro.com
  rules:
  - apiGroups:
    - "isidoro.com"
    apiVersions:
    - v1
    operations:
    - CREATE
    resources:
    - tests
  clientConfig:
  	# this must be HTTPS
    url: https://192.168.1.233:8080
    caBundle: REPLACEME
```

The easiest way to generate a certificate to serve the webhook is to use the cluster’s ability to generate new certificates using its own certificate authority (CA).



### More info



[https://kubebuilder.io/](https://kubebuilder.io/)
